---
layout: 01_post
title: "Mapnik 3.0.0 Release"
author: Blake Thompson
category: Mapnik
---

It is official! We have released Mapnik 3.0.0! This has been an effort over two years in the making and we are beyond excited to make this milestone. 

So many people have helped us develop, document, and debug during these past two years and we are so grateful to our community for all the support. Thank you!

## Download

You can [download the official source](https://github.com/mapnik/mapnik/archive/v3.0.0.tar.gz) directly or you can grab it from our [downloads page](/pages/downloads.html).

## What Changed

The 3.0 release is a major milestone for Mapnik and includes many performance and design improvements. The is the first release to provide text shaping using the harfbuzz library. This harfbuzz support unlocks improved rendering and layer for many new languages, particularly SE Asian scripts. The internal storage for working with images and geometries has been made more flexible, faster, and strongly typed. The python bindings that were previously bundled with Mapnik have now been moved to <https://github.com/mapnik/python-mapnik> and are versioned independently.

## Looking Forward

There is still plenty to work on in Mapnik and we are excited to work on fixing many different issues we know exist already. We want to keep expanding on our abilities to provide fast and beautiful maps.

We are planning on making our future releases at a quicker pace, and we are looking at ways to improve the distribution of our binary packages. We recognize that building from source is not ideal for many developers and we are looking for more ways to make our different language bindings easier to install and learn to use. 

Expect to see more documentation and more news here soon!
